Okay.
Well, congratulations.
We're talking to Valerie Martin about her new book.
I don't think I interviewed you in the previous book.
I'm sure I didn't.
But you certainly have built up legions of followers with the work you've been doing.
Tell me how you go from Mary Riley to the Great Divorce.
Is there a thematic kind of connection here?
Well, I think they probably are, but they weren't known to me when I started.
Mary Riley is about Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde, so it's about somebody with two personalities and about a dark side.
I think when I started this book, The Great Divorce, I wanted to do something completely different, but it turned out that it, too, is about people who have two sides and a dark side.
And in this book, there's a character who actually turns into a weapon.
The metamorphosis does seem to be a preoccupation of yours.
Yeah, it is.
Why is that?
I don't know.
I've always liked stories about transformation of metamorphosis.
I like to see statues of creatures that are half human, half bad.
But I think it's also because I grew up in New Orleans where there are a lot of strange stories about dogs and werewolves.
So it's partly that, but it's partly that they serve as metaphors to talk about the unconscious and also imagination.
The title of this book, of course, gives no indication of what it's about.
Again, how about picking up on this concept of a great divorce?
I mean, that could be anything, couldn't it?
That could be Charles and Diana.
Yeah, I think that was a really great book.
They haven't divorced yet, but you see what I'm saying?
Yeah.
Well, I think that there is a... Let me just interject.
How about if you just talk at some length about, first of all, you have this idea which you just discussed, and then taking this as a premise and working it into this concept that you have of a great divorce.
Maybe just talk a little bit about that.
Well, I think that...
It comes out of an argument I have with myself about feelings about the wild and about nature and about how we talk about human nature.
When we talk about human nature, we talk about good.
Someone behaves badly.
You say we don't talk about anything good.
Well, not quite easily.
You say, gee, human nature is sort of a what can you expect?
Well, if you say somebody behaves like an animal, well, that means they behave very badly.
At the same time, there's a sort of noble beast involving a notion that animals are in some ways more moral than we are.
Or amoral, at least.
Yeah, that they are more natural than we are.
I mean, a shark doesn't eat you because he hates you.
That's right, yeah.
The notion of somebody murdering somebody just because they're trying to tell them to stay home, that seems unnapped because it's an animal who is a steward.
So that suggests that we wouldn't be unnapped.
Well, let's go on now to the divorce, the great divorce itself.
This book, the narrator thinks of it as the separation between all humans and all of nature.
which took place a long time ago.
And then, of course, the novelist's job is to take this and to make a wonderfully engaging story out of it.
Tell me about the creative process that ensues from that starting point.
Well, the story really stands in my mind, and it's kind of interesting.
I'm sorry, the woman, what?
Sowing.
Sowing, okay.
Where stuff like that comes from, I don't know.
And I began to think about wanting to write about the vanity of the wild and the place of it would be a zoo.
That's where the central story comes from, the story of a veterinarian who literally does in order to sew it together.
And then the other story,
my feelings about the way we romanticize the one.
Elizabeth, who lives here in the 19th century, imagined that he could go to the Cleveland doctor and be liberated from her body to her husband by turning into a wedding and told that this could happen.
I believe it could happen, because it was at a time when people did believe it.
Whereas Camille, who also would like to be
I guess I read someplace that this started when you had heard about a woman vet veterinarian at the New Orleans Zoo.
Yeah, it was a bit of luck.
I was sort of looking around and thinking that I wanted to find out what goes on behind the scenes to do.
And a good friend called me and said, well, I have a new name for it.
It's almost like karma, isn't it?
It's strange.
You know how books sometimes come from you?
Somebody will keep mentioning a book.
It sounds out to be exactly the book we use.
It's amazing.
The zoo, of course, is a metaphor in its own right, isn't it?
Yeah, it's the place where we keep the wild behind bars.
But on the other end, it can almost be seen as the last refuge, too, couldn't it?
Well, that's what's so ironic about it.
The zoo is so sad.
The people who work in the zoo really do see it as an ark, and they're trying to save the zoo.
And coincidental for this, you see the reports of the tigers in Asia.
I mean, it's just heartbreaking.
It's amazing.
Do you share the same pessimism?
I really do, especially about tigers.
You know, animals that are so important in our imagination and cultural memories, and they represent all sorts of magic and history.
They're also very dangerous, and they require a really large habitat, and those habitat are just scary.
I can't imagine where they can come back.
This is everywhere, or just Asia?
It's everywhere tigers were.
Tigers are really...
There are not many other grasses.
But some bigger cats may have a slightly better day.
I think that tigers really require a fairly large habitat.
Do you also think that they will die out of zoos as well?
Well, once the gene pools get down small enough, there's not enough diversity in the gene pools.
I mean, you know, it's just like what happens to the humans.
We have hemophilia, you know, in the ground.
Some weak strain presents in all captive tigers.
There's already problems with something.
One of them, one of them, they've already got genetic problems in the captive pool.
So that if some little thing comes along, they'll all get wiped out.
It's so sad.
I mean, I don't know if you've had a chance to see the Audubon watercolor exhibition.
No, I just heard about it.
I was thinking I'd like to go.
Well, you should go see it.
You know, these are the original watercolors.
And, yeah, it's really quite wonderful.
I mean, in fact, we saw it twice.
We saw it down in Washington, and we saw it up here.
And I think the one up here is better, by the way.
They have a few more things.
It's not just watercolors, and they have a couple of artifacts.
I've got one.
Yeah, I really strongly recommend it.
But, you know, you walk by and then you see the Carolina parrot.
And right next to that is the passenger pigeon.
Beautiful.
And they actually have some stuffed examples of these, I think.
I know those were down in Washington.
Okay.
But there they are, you know, the only parakeet native to North America.
Extinct.
Why?
Because they had lovely feathers for hats.
the passenger pigeon for any number of them.
Beautiful birds, you know, extinct.
You know, I read a lot of Audubon's letters, and what's really strange is that although he walked through a world that's so rich and filled with life at that time, he could have any kind of be right beside his fear for the animals.
Now, would you describe yourself as an animal activist, or are you a novelist who's concerned?
I mean, tell me a little bit about where you're coming from in this.
Well, I'm not in despair, and I would certainly do what I can and try to encourage everybody else to.
But I also think it's important to be realistic about what we're up against.
And sometimes I think people feel like, well, I'm just recycling.
That'll help, and of extension will, but the speed with which this is happening is truly frightening.
It's more than a species a day going out of existence now.
Say that again?
It's more than a species every day that goes out of existence.
I mean, is this documented?
Yeah, yeah.
You know, a plant that has, and a lot of it's in the rainforest where
Yeah, and things are going out of existence that we never even knew existed before we even had a chance to classify them.
Yeah, something you would never notice.
I've always personally felt mosquitoes can go out of existence.
Yeah, that's right.
But they have a place on the chain.
And that's the other thing, of course, that it is a chain.
It starts to break down.
I mean, you go through the Everglades sometime, and you just see how everything works.
I mean, the alligators dig little holes that the fish can come in.
It's amazing.
And you mess up one of those links, and the whole thing is threatened.
And strangely enough, though, I don't want to live next door to a tiger as a part of the link.
You know, this guy, Jim Farmer, who you see every once in a while, I mean, I'm terrified of snakes, you know?
I mean, it's primal.
Yeah, rats.
But I can't see any use for rats, I have to say, as an old Navy guy.
But, you know, you certainly don't want to make friends with them.
I don't imagine you ever could, but...
They got a purpose, don't they?
They have a purpose.
Yeah.
Once snakes are gone, well, that could cause a lot of stuff.
So now let's talk about, I mean, all right, so you have this sense, and you want to talk about it in a book.
But, of course, you choose to do this through the fiction form.
What do you start with?
Do you start with a story and your characters, or do you start with this premise and then tell me how this developed?
Okay.
work differently.
This one really did start with the three stories pretty clear in my mind, especially in the way that they would connect.
That is, I knew that Paul was going to be researching the old story of the Catwoman of St.
Francis.
And I knew that Ellen and Camille would be connected because they both work as a suit.
So that's sort of a proposition, and I set the characters rolling and watching them rub up against each other and see what happens.
Some things I know.
I knew the last sentence, but I didn't know other things.
For instance, I didn't know what was going to happen to Camille.
And that became clear as the story moved on.
I also didn't know in what ways the stories would intertwine.
And that was very pleasurable because they did start to sort of reflect off of each other or comment on each other.
I had written maybe 60 pages and realized I'd written three dinner parties.
One of them wasn't actually a dinner party.
It was Camille having a miserable grilled cheese sandwich.
That's her idea of a dinner party.
So I wrote from the beginning to the end.
I write by hand on blue-foot paper.
So I didn't write one story and plug it into the other.
They really came out of each other.
Is it pretty much clean, straight through?
Yeah, I pretty much write it straight through and then type it.
Type it on manuscript paper or on a word processor?
No, no, I don't use a word processor.
I just use loosely paper.
Even when you're typing?
I use the most primitive typewriter.
It does have an erase feature.
Is this just out of habit, or do you have something?
I've tried other ways, and this is the fastest way for me.
and I go off on fewer tangents and make fewer wrong turns.
I usually have a little work at the end in the last chapters, and I did have to make a few changes towards the end because I get tired and try to rush.
How long did you work on this book?
Three years.
Really?
Yeah, it was a long one.
With Mary Riley, it was about a year ago.
This was harder than Riley?
Oh, it's twice as big.
I'm sorry, but I'm in terms of the, was it more daunting a task for you?
Yeah, it was a much harder task.
For one thing, it's not in the first person, so you don't have a character's voice to pull the reason going through.
You have to interest them in the characters by approaching them from outside.
I find that more difficult.
Had you thought at all about narrating this, having one of the characters?
Yeah, I knew it would be impossible.
Especially if you have those three different stories.
Right, and I wanted to have a consciousness outside of it that looks at the whole picture because to me that's what the great divorce is.
There's these two pictures running along beside each other.
So I wanted to have an eyeball that could see all that.
We see wild animals and wild animals see us.
couldn't actually describe what each sees as in any way.
In your view, is it a hopeful book?
I think that some reviewer described it as a thin glimmer of hope.
Do you agree with that reviewer?
Yeah.
Why not?
I thought that the end, and it came partly from my experience at the zoo watching the people who work there,
dedicated they are to the hopeless work that it has a great deal of meaning in what they do they love their work and it's worthwhile and so that's hopeful uh now i understand that our film is in the works on this no not for this for mary reilly oh i see have you optioned this not yet this would be this would really pose some some uh it would be kind of formidable don't you think for a screenwriter i think it's scary for hollywood right now because there's too many characters
And you can't summarize the story in a line.
But there seems to be a little interest in the fact that I was just in L.A.
Hopefully somebody will be brave enough to take it on.
Because I think it would make a nice film, but it would be difficult.
But you've got to have, you know, they're so single-minded out there.
They really don't like depressing stories.
You know, it's just a problem.
It's true.
They don't like depressing stories.
They're both a practical problem.
Too many actors.
Yeah.
How do you keep things in focus?
I mean, clearly you are a writer and your job is to engage.
And you might even hope to entertain as well.
Uh, you know, how do you keep that in check?
Why do you have this other agenda, uh, cooking, you know?
I keep them grinding my axe.
Exactly.
This is a festival of images this morning.
Yeah, it's really hard because I have a lot of opinions and in some ways I just would like to go on tirade.
But, um, I think that the virtue of the novel is that, uh,
It can do more than one thing.
It can do a lot more than give somebody a simple message.
It can give the most complicated message through the story and the interactions of the characters.
I think I love the form of the novel so much.
It has so much room in it and potential that I have to remind myself to shut up and let the characters talk.
You mentioned that going from Mary Riley to this book, you really wanted to do something that was different.
Yeah, I always do.
Okay.
How do you do that?
I mean, how do you decide, well, all right, this book was a first-person book.
It focused on one woman.
I don't think it's so much that I try to change my style because I would also like people to, the way I feel about the writers I love, say, Henry James or Jane Austen or the Brontes or somebody with a simple style I can move, that you can pick up any of the books and say, I know who wrote this.
I would like to have that continuity of, for want of a better word, I'll call it style, in all my books.
Well, you see it as a body of work.
Yeah.
But I want to change the subject matter.
I really do see them as one leading into the other.
And then being more and more about the whole process of writing the novel.
The book to me is more about, in some ways, the imagination than others.
And how it works.
Especially how it works as a novel.
and how it worked historically.
Yeah.
Looking at the cover art, not that we ever discuss cover art in my stories, but did you think it reflects the spirit of the book?
Well... I guess I'm putting it gently.
Again, the title is, it could really, you have to learn more about the book to know what the book is.
Let me think about the title of it.
Well, I think it's fine.
Oh, absolutely.
I'm not objecting in any way.
Did you have this title all along, by the way?
I did, and I had to sort of push it because it was not popular.
My editor didn't like it for a while.
We tried other titles.
It was called Unnatural, so I came for a while.
Which, I guess...
Probably is more pertinent to what the book is about.
I guess.
But I, for some reason, wanted that title, The Great Divorce.
Yeah, well, no, it's fine.
And Nan edited the book?
Yeah.
She's crying.
I know Nan, too.
Very nice woman.
Wonderful.
And what do you go to next now?
I want to write a book about a really good meaning.
I'm not sure what it'll be yet.
Now, I've not read all of your books.
Have you written about men?
Yeah, I have, in fact, written a book from the point of view of a man, Alexander II.
Now, that's a woman's name.
Yeah, well... I'm looking at it right here.
But it's narrated by a man named Claude.
It's that sort of reverse Gothic.
You know how...
In the Gothic, a woman goes to a strange house where there's a man.
Some kind of mysterious thing in the past.
This is about a man who gets taken to a strange house with his women.
Mysterious things in the past.
Is there a sense of continuity in audio books?
You mentioned that this is something that you see, which I can hear about five, six books, I guess.
In some ways, I see myself struggling to get away from it, but there it is.
Okay.
I told my agent I'm going to give up on the gossip now, no more.
And she just laughed.
Are you working on anything?
I'm kind of sketching around.
I think I'll probably get started when this book tour is over.
Yeah.
Well, that's soon, I guess, right?
Well, we have the book, which is always number one when I'm writing.
We really haven't discussed it because it speaks for itself.
I think I've got some nice quotes here.
I do write for a couple of newspapers.
I'm in Worcester and I'm in Quincy.
Pretty good, and I have a couple of other papers that are starting to take my feature, too.
Okay.
Well, I hope we can help.
Keep working.
Thank you.
Thanks a lot.
Okay, take care, and I hope we meet again.
Okay, good talking with you.
Bye-bye.